.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt PATCHPANEL.YAML 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm patchpanel.yaml
.Nd configuration file for PatchPanel
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is the bootstrap configuration file for
.Xr patchpanel 8 .
It uses YAML 1.2 and a metadata-wrapped schema: every leaf value is an
object carrying not just the value itself but type information,
documentation, and UI presentation hints. This schema drives the
auto-generated Settings UI in the PatchPanel management web interface.
.Pp
The file is typically located at
.Pa /etc/patchpanel/config.yaml
and is read by
.Xr patchpanel 8
at startup. The path can be overridden via the
.Ev CONFIG_PATH
environment variable, which the bundled systemd unit sets to the
default location.
.Pp
.Nm
holds
.Sy bootstrap
state \(em paths, ports, SSL, authentication strategy, log directory.
The HAProxy data model (frontends, backends, ACLs, certs) lives in a
separate
.Sy state document
at
.Pa /var/lib/patchpanel/state.json
and is mutated through the management UI rather than this file.
.Sh METADATA SCHEMA
Every leaf value carries the following keys:
.Bl -tag -width "subsection_key"
.It Cm type
One of:
.Sy string , integer , boolean , password , host , select , array , object , textarea .
.It Cm value
The actual value at that path.
.It Cm description
Human-readable label / help text shown in the Settings UI.
.It Cm section
Top-level Settings UI section name (see
.Sx _sections
below).
.It Cm subsection
Group within a section (optional).
.It Cm order
Integer ordering hint within section/subsection.
.It Cm required
Boolean. If true, the field must be set.
.It Cm validation
Optional
.Sy { min , max }
nested object for numeric bounds.
.It Cm options
For
.Sy select
type: array of allowed values.
.It Cm depends_on
Sibling field name. Field is only rendered when the named sibling
matches
.Cm show_when .
.It Cm show_when
Array of values that activate this field.
.It Cm conditional
Alternative to
.Sy depends_on / show_when
with a full dotted path:
.Sy { field: 'a.b.c' , value: scalar | array } .
.El
.Pp
The
.Sy _sections
mapping at the top of the file declares the Settings UI tabs:
.Pp
.Bd -literal -offset indent
_sections:
  Server:
    description: HTTP server bind, ports, SSL
    icon: fas fa-server
    order: 1
  HAProxy:
    description: HAProxy paths and reload behaviour
    icon: fas fa-network-wired
    order: 2
.Ed
.Sh CONFIGURATION SECTIONS
.Ss mode
Daemon operating mode.
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm homeassistant"
.It Cm homeassistant
Inside the HAProxy HA add-on. Trusts the supervisor proxy IP, parses
.Ev X-Ingress-Path
for asset URLs, reads
.Ev X-Remote-User-*
for audit attribution. No local authentication; no first-run wizard.
.It Cm standalone
Bare-metal / VM / Docker-non-HA install. Generates
.Pa /etc/patchpanel/setup.token
on first boot, runs in setup-only mode until consumed by the wizard.
After setup, authentication is session cookies or API keys.
.El
.Ss server
HTTP server settings: bind host, port, trust-proxy chain, graceful
shutdown grace period, ingress-path header name.
.Ss ssl
TLS termination for the management UI.
.Cm enabled
toggles HTTPS;
.Cm generate
toggles runtime self-signed cert generation;
.Cm key / cert
are filesystem paths.
.Ss paths
Filesystem paths
.Nm patchpanel
reads or writes:
.Sy state.json , audit.sqlite , snapshots/ , geoip/ , credentials/ ,
.Sy haproxy.cfg , haproxy/certs/ , haproxy/master.sock ,
.Sy letsencrypt/ , trusted-cas/ , trusted-crls/ , certbot , haproxy .
.Ss haproxy
Reload behaviour:
.Cm method
(master-socket | systemctl | child-process),
.Cm hardStopAfter ,
.Cm validateBeforeReload ,
.Cm rollbackOnFailure .
.Ss renewal
Cron schedule and DNS-01 propagation delay for certbot renewals.
.Ss auth
Authentication strategy:
.Sy none ,
.Sy ha-ingress ,
.Sy basic ,
.Sy oidc .
.Ss security
JWT secret (postinst-substituted), API-key bcrypt rounds, session
cookie settings, CSRF gate, helmet / CSP / HSTS toggles.
.Ss cors
Whitelist origins for the management API.
.Ss rate_limiting
Tiered limits: auth-strict, write, read-permissive.
.Ss logging
.Cm level
(error | warn | info | debug) and
.Cm format
(pretty | json).
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /var/lib/patchpanel/state.json"
.It Pa /etc/patchpanel/config.yaml
This file
.It Pa /etc/patchpanel/.jwt-secret
JWT signing key (postinst-generated, mode 0600)
.It Pa /etc/patchpanel/setup.token
First-run wizard gate (fresh installs only)
.It Pa /var/lib/patchpanel/state.json
HAProxy data model (canonical source of truth)
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Excerpt showing the metadata wrapper on a few representative leaves:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
_sections:
  Server:
    description: HTTP server bind, ports, SSL
    icon: fas fa-server
    order: 1

server:
  port:
    type: integer
    value: 8099
    description: TCP port for the management UI
    section: Server
    subsection: Bind
    order: 1
    validation:
      min: 1
      max: 65535
  trust_proxy:
    type: array
    value: []
    description: Trusted upstream proxies (CIDR list)
    section: Server
    subsection: Bind
    order: 2

ssl:
  enabled:
    type: boolean
    value: true
    description: Serve management UI over HTTPS
    section: Server
    subsection: TLS
    order: 1
  cert:
    type: string
    value: /etc/patchpanel/ssl/cert.pem
    description: TLS certificate path
    section: Server
    subsection: TLS
    order: 2
    depends_on: enabled
    show_when: [true]

security:
  jwt_secret:
    type: password
    value: __JWT_SECRET_FROM_FILE__
    description: Session / JWT signing key
    section: Security
    required: true
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Sy __JWT_SECRET_FROM_FILE__
sentinel is substituted by the postinst script with the contents of
.Pa /etc/patchpanel/.jwt-secret
on fresh install.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
Configuration errors prevent startup. The most common causes:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
Invalid YAML syntax (indentation, mixed tabs/spaces)
.It
Non-existent file paths referenced from
.Sy ssl.cert ,
.Sy ssl.key ,
.Sy paths.haproxyConfig
.It
A
.Sy required: true
field with an unset
.Sy value
.It
.Sy type: integer
with a value outside
.Sy validation: { min, max }
.It
Insufficient permissions on
.Pa /etc/haproxy/ ,
.Pa /var/lib/patchpanel/ ,
or
.Pa /etc/letsencrypt/
.El
.Sh UPGRADE BEHAVIOUR
On
.Cm apt upgrade ,
.Pa /etc/patchpanel/config.yaml
is preserved. The
.Xr patchpanel 8
daemon runs its config migrator at startup, which merges new keys from
the shipped template
.Pa ( /opt/patchpanel/config-templates/production-config.yaml )
into the user's config while preserving every
.Sy value
the user has changed. Pre-merge, a timestamped backup is written
alongside the config file:
.Pa /etc/patchpanel/config.yaml.backup.<unixtime> .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr patchpanel 8 ,
.Xr haproxy 1 ,
.Xr yaml 7 ,
.Xr systemctl 1
.Sh STANDARDS
YAML 1.2 (
.Lk https://yaml.org/spec/1.2.2/ ).
.\" x-release-please-version
