.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt PATCHPANEL 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm patchpanel
.Nd state-driven HAProxy management daemon
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl -help
.Op Fl -version
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility is a state-driven configuration manager and web UI for
.Xr haproxy 1 .
It renders
.Pa /etc/haproxy/haproxy.cfg
from a validated JSON state document, validates the result with
.Cm haproxy -c ,
atomically swaps the file on disk, and reloads HAProxy via the master
CLI socket. It also manages certificate lifecycle (Let's Encrypt via
.Xr certbot 1
plus bring-your-own PEM uploads), trusted CA / CRL bundles, and exposes
a REST API for remote control.
.Pp
.Nm
is a Node.js Express application. It does not proxy traffic itself \(em
that is HAProxy's job. It manages HAProxy's configuration.
.Sh CONFIGURATION
.Nm
reads its configuration from
.Pa /etc/patchpanel/config.yaml
by default. The path can be overridden via the
.Ev CONFIG_PATH
environment variable, which the bundled systemd unit sets explicitly.
The configuration file uses a metadata-wrapped YAML format; see
.Xr patchpanel.yaml 5
for the full schema.
.Pp
The runtime
.Sy state document
\(em the HAProxy data model itself (frontends, backends, ACLs, rules,
certs, providers) \(em is stored separately at
.Pa /var/lib/patchpanel/state.json
and edited through the management UI on every change. The bootstrap
config in
.Pa /etc/patchpanel/config.yaml
is read-mostly and controls daemon behaviour (ports, SSL, paths,
authentication strategy, logging).
.Sh SERVICE MANAGEMENT
.Nm
is managed through systemd:
.Pp
.Dl # systemctl enable --now patchpanel
.Dl # systemctl status patchpanel
.Dl # journalctl -fu patchpanel
.Pp
The service runs as the unprivileged
.Sy patchpanel
user. To allow it to rewrite
.Pa /etc/haproxy/haproxy.cfg ,
the postinst adds
.Sy patchpanel
to the
.Sy haproxy
group if one exists.
.Sh WEB INTERFACE
.Nm
serves a React single-page application from the same Express process.
Default access in standalone mode:
.Pp
.Dl https://localhost:8099
.Pp
On first launch a setup token is generated in
.Pa /etc/patchpanel/setup.token
and printed by the postinst script. Paste the token into the first-run
wizard to claim the admin account; the file is then removed.
.Pp
When
.Nm
runs as a Home Assistant add-on, no local authentication runs: the
supervisor's ingress proxy gates access and
.Nm
reads
.Ev X-Remote-User-*
headers for audit attribution.
.Sh API
.Nm
provides a REST API for state CRUD, certificate lifecycle, runtime
control of HAProxy backends and frontends, live stats, audit history,
and configuration snapshots. Interactive documentation is at
.Pp
.Dl https://localhost:8099/api-docs
.Pp
Endpoints accept either a session cookie (browser admin UI) or a
bcrypt-hashed API key passed as
.Sy Authorization: Bearer <token> .
Per-key permission scopes:
.Sy read , state-write , cert-renew , runtime-control , haproxy-control .
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /var/lib/patchpanel/state.json"
.It Pa /etc/patchpanel/config.yaml
Daemon configuration (metadata-wrapped YAML)
.It Pa /etc/patchpanel/.jwt-secret
Session / JWT signing secret (generated by postinst, mode 0600)
.It Pa /etc/patchpanel/setup.token
First-run wizard gate (generated on fresh install, consumed by wizard)
.It Pa /etc/patchpanel/ssl/
Self-signed cert + key for the management UI
.It Pa /var/lib/patchpanel/state.json
The HAProxy state document; canonical source of truth for haproxy.cfg
.It Pa /var/lib/patchpanel/audit.sqlite
Audit log of every state mutation
.It Pa /var/lib/patchpanel/snapshots/
Time-machine snapshots of state.json
.It Pa /etc/haproxy/haproxy.cfg
Rendered HAProxy config (generated; never hand-edit)
.It Pa /opt/patchpanel/
Installation directory
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh EXAMPLES
Start the service:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# systemctl enable --now patchpanel
.Ed
.Pp
Tail the log:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# journalctl -fu patchpanel
.Ed
.Pp
Manual launch for debugging (will run as root):
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# cd /opt/patchpanel && CONFIG_PATH=/etc/patchpanel/config.yaml \\
    node server/src/server.js
.Ed
.Pp
Read state via API:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ curl -k -H "Authorization: Bearer $KEY" \\
    https://localhost:8099/api/state | jq .
.Ed
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
Configuration errors prevent startup. Common causes: invalid YAML
syntax, paths to nonexistent files, insufficient permissions on
.Pa /etc/haproxy/ ,
or a malformed
.Pa state.json
that fails Zod schema validation.
.Pp
Common diagnostic steps:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
Check service status:
.Cm systemctl status patchpanel
.It
Review logs:
.Cm journalctl -fu patchpanel
.It
Verify the user can write the HAProxy config:
.Cm sudo -u patchpanel test -w /etc/haproxy/haproxy.cfg
.It
Verify HAProxy itself accepts the rendered config:
.Cm haproxy -c -f /etc/haproxy/haproxy.cfg
.It
Restart cleanly after a config change:
.Cm systemctl restart patchpanel
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr patchpanel.yaml 5 ,
.Xr haproxy 1 ,
.Xr certbot 1 ,
.Xr systemctl 1 ,
.Xr journalctl 1
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
first appeared as the
.Sy patchpanel
component of the
.Xr haproxy 1
Home Assistant add-on, then split into a standalone Debian package.
.\" x-release-please-version
.Sh AUTHORS
.An STARTcloud Aq Mt MarkProminic@users.noreply.github.com
.Sh SECURITY
.Nm
holds the keys to the HAProxy castle: it writes
.Pa haproxy.cfg ,
reloads the daemon, and stores private keys for every certificate
HAProxy serves. A compromise of
.Nm
is a compromise of HAProxy. Hardening highlights:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
Runs as the unprivileged
.Sy patchpanel
user; uses
.Sy CAP_NET_BIND_SERVICE
only for binding ports below 1024
.It
.Pa /etc/patchpanel/.jwt-secret
and
.Pa /etc/patchpanel/setup.token
are mode 0600, owned by
.Sy patchpanel
.It
API keys are bcrypt-hashed at rest (cost 12) with per-key permission
scopes and optional expiry (max one year)
.It
Every state mutation is recorded in the audit log with actor + outcome
.It
The state document is Zod-validated before rendering;
.Cm haproxy -c
is run against the rendered cfg before atomic swap
.El
.Pp
Refer to
.Pa /usr/share/doc/patchpanel/SECURITY.md
or
.Lk https://patchpanel.startcloud.com/docs/security/
for the full security policy.
